# VVS Benchmarks

Benchmark code for the paper [Efficient Search of Ultra-Large Synthesis On-Demand Libraries with Chemical Language Models](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.09.04.674350v1.full)

Code subject to change during peer review process

Below are complete instructions for recreating the analysis in the paper, including downloading and processing raw datasets, running experiments, generating and analyzing results. Running the code may produce slightly different results due to the stochastic nature of several steps in the process. To reproduce paper figures, download the [Zenodo data archive](https://zenodo.org/uploads/18615633) and place in the `src/blob_store/internal` directory.

NOTE: Some benchmarks rely on OpenEye docking and ROCS scoring, which requires an OpenEye license file saved at `./src/score_consumer/secrets/oe_license.txt`


## 1. Download Datasets and Create Artifacts
All datasets used in the paper are downloaded from external sources. Code in the `create_artifacts` downloads the relevant datasets, performs light preprocessing, and creates the datasets used for training the Embedding Compression and Embedding Decomposer models.

The following datasets/artifacts are downloaded:

* Zinc 15 10M dataset [ref](https://deepchem.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api_reference/moleculenet.html#zinc15-datasets)
* Lyu 140M dataset [ref](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30728502/), refered to as "D4" in the codebase
* Enamine building blocks and SMARTS reactions from the Synthemol paper [ref](https://www.nature.com/articles/s42256-024-00809-7)
* Synthemol random forest models [ref](https://www.nature.com/articles/s42256-024-00809-7)
* COCONUT natural products dataset [ref](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33423696/)
* Thompson Sampling github repo [ref](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jcim.3c01790)
* CHEMBL EGFR IC50 data [ref](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/chembl/)

After downloading, the following datasets are created within the repo:

* Enamine Assembled dataset - consists of `{(bb1, bb2), (product)}` triples generated by computational synthesis using the downloaded building blocks and reactions 
* Embedding Compression training dataset - consists of SMILES sampled from the Zinc 10M, Lyu 140M and Enamine Assembled datasets

To reproduce the datasets, run the following (note this will be slow):

```
cd src/create_artifacts
./run_download_files.sh
```

Exact CSV files of the Enamine Assembled and Embedding Compression datasets used in this work are available in the [Zenodo data archive](https://zenodo.org/uploads/18615633).



## 2. Train Models

Three classes of models are trained in this repo:

#### EGFR MLP
MLP model predicting EGFR binding affinity using CHEMBL IC50 data. This model is used as a target score for benchmarks. This model can be trained via:

```
cd src/model_training/erbb1_mlp
./process_dataset.sh
./train_erbb1_mlp.sh
```

Exact weights used for this work can be downloaded via [huggingface](https://huggingface.co/entropy/erbb1_mlp)

#### Embedding Compression Models

Embedding Compression models are used to compress chemical language model (CLM) embeddings to lower dimensions. These models can be trained via:

```
cd src/model_training/embedding_compression
./process_dataset.sh
./train_model1.sh
```

NOTE: `process_dataset.sh` pre-computes CLM embeddings, which is slow and requires significant disk space. Processing both datasets requires about 1000 GB disk space and yields about 500 GB of files when finished. 

The training script supports a number of hyperparameters. These can be configured in the `src/model_training/embedding_compression/sweep_space1.yaml` file. See the training file at `src/model_training/embedding_compression/src/train.py` for a full list of supported training arguments.

Exact weights used for this work can be downloaded via [huggingface](https://huggingface.co/entropy/roberta_zinc_compression_encoder).

#### Embedding Decomposer Models

Embedding Decomposer models are used to predict building block embeddings from product molecule embeddings.

These models can be trained via:

```
cd src/model_training/enamine_decomposer
./process_dataset.sh
./train_model.sh
```

NOTE: `process_dataset.sh` pre-computes CLM embeddings, which is slow and requires significant disk space. Processing both datasets requires about 1000 GB disk space and yields about 500 GB of files when finished. 

NOTE: the training code assumes the Embedding Compression models have already been trained and saved to the relevant `blob_store` location (this is done automatically by the Embedding Compression training code). If attempting to run without training the compression models, run the following to save weights to the correct location:

```python
from transformers import AutoModel

compression_encoder = AutoModel.from_pretrained("entropy/roberta_zinc_compression_encoder", 
                                                trust_remote_code=True)

SAVE_DIR = "./src/blob_store/internal/model_weights/compression_heads.pt"
compression_encoder.save_encoders(SAVE_DIR)
```

The training script supports a number of hyperparameters. These can be configured in the `src/model_training/enamine_decomposer/sweep_space.yaml` file. See the training file at `src/model_training/enamine_decomposer/src/train.py` for a full list of supported training arguments.

Exact weights of the final decomposer model used for this work can be downloaded via [huggingface](https://huggingface.co/entropy/roberta_zinc_compression_encoder). Weights of various decomposer models trained for loss ablation experiments can be downloaded from the [Zenodo data archive](https://zenodo.org/uploads/18615633).

## 3. Model Benchmarks and Plot Generation

We perform several evaluations of the Embedding Compression and Embedding Decomposer models. Some analysis scripts rely on hard-coded paths for specific model training runs. To reproduce, download the `training_runs` data directory from the [Zenodo data archive](https://zenodo.org/uploads/18615633).


#### Embedding Compression Evaluation

Run the following:

```
cd src/data_analysis
./src/model_evaluation/embedding_compression/run.sh generate
./src/model_evaluation/embedding_compression/run.sh plot
```

This code generates:

* Four pannel figure showing ablations for loss function and model size
* Qualitative comparison plots for retrieval performance at different embedding sizes 

#### Embedding Decomposer Evaluation

Run the following:

```
cd src/data_analysis
./src/model_evaluation/enamine_decomposer/run.sh generate
./src/model_evaluation/enamine_decomposer/run.sh plot
```

This code generates:

* Loss function ablation plot
* Qualitative retrieval performance plots 
* Heatmap of retrieval accuracy for different input/output embedding size combinations 
* Plot evaluating "flipped predictions" and retrieval miss rate as a function of SMILES length


## 4. Set Up Scoring Endpoints

Subsequent benchmarks make use of different scoring functions as optimization targets. These are set up using docker compose. The compose framework creates the following containers:

* `score_consumer` - runs CPU scoring functions
* `score_consumer_gpu` - runs GPU scoring functions
* `rabbitmq` - queue system used by benchmarks to execute scoring functions

NOTE: OpenEye docking and ROCS scoring functions require an OpenEye license file saved at `./src/score_consumer/secrets/oe_license.txt`

Run the following to create the scoring functions:

```
cd src/score_consumer
docker compose -f docker-compose-self-contained.yml up -d --build
docker compose -f docker-compose-self-contained.yml scale score_consumer={SCORE_WORKERS}
```

NOTE: the docker compose scale command creates replicas of the CPU score consumer for parallel processing. Data for the paper was generated with `SCORE_WORKERS=64`

NOTE: to clean up score consumers when no longer needed, run `docker compose -f docker-compose-self-contained.yml down`

## 5. BBKNN Evaluations

We perform several evaluations of the BBKNN algorithm. Run the following:

```
cd src/bbknn
./run.sh bbknn
./run.sh natprod
./run.sh egfr
```

This performs the following evaluations:

* `./run.sh bbknn` - runs BBKNN with query molecules from the Enamine Assembled and Lyu 140M datasets
* `./run.sh natprod` - runs BBKNN with query molecules from the COCONUT natural product dataset
* `./run.sh egfr` - runs BBKNN with query molecules of known EGFR ligands and scores the results with the OpenEye docking scoring endpoint. Also produces poses of specific known EGFR ligands and similar molecules retrieved by BBKNN

After generating data, evaluate and plot the results via:

```
cd src/data_analysis
./src/bbknn/run.sh cosine
./src/bbknn/run.sh sampling
./src/bbknn/run.sh egfr 
```

This performs the following evaluations:

* `./src/bbknn/run.sh cosine` - compares query and result molecules on the basis of cosine and Tanimoto similarity. Generates aggregate plots of cosine and Tanimoto similarity correlation and panel plots of molecules where cosine and Tanimoto disagree strongly on molecule similarity
* `./src/bbknn/run.sh sampling` - generates bar plots of query/result similarity for Enamine Assembled, Lyu 140M and COCONUT molecules. Generates plots of total results vs BBKNN `k` parameter. Generates molecule grid plots of example query/result pairs from Enamine Assembled, Lyu 140M and COCONUT molecules
* `./src/bbknn/run.sh egfr ` - generates plots of docking score gain vs sampling depth and example query/result molecule pairs with corresponding docking score


## 6. VVS Benchmarks

We perform several evaluations of the VVS algorithm

#### Setup

Several retrieval indices are pre-computed and used in downstream benchmarks. 

```
cd src/vvs_local
./run.sh generate_indices
```

#### Embedding size latency

This code evaluates retrieval latency at different embedding sizes

```
cd src/vvs_local
./run.sh compression_eval
```

#### Learning Rate Sweeps

This code evaluates VVS performance over a wide range of learning rates to determine learning rate sensitivity. Learning rate sweeps are performed in the enumerated space using KNN retrieval (configured via `src/vvs_local/lr_sweep_knn.yaml`) and decomposed space using BBKNN (configured via `src/vvs_local/lr_sweep_bbknn.yaml`).

```
cd src/vvs_local
./run.sh lr_sweep --cfg lr_sweep_bbknn.yaml
./run.sh lr_sweep --cfg lr_sweep_knn.yaml
```

#### VVS Benchmarks

This code performs hyperparameter sweeps for VVS (configured via `src/vvs_local/hyperparam_configs/bbknn_sweep.yaml`).

```
cd src/vvs_local
./run.sh hyperparam_sweep --cfg bbknn_sweep.yaml --run_type sweep
```

#### Data Analysis 

This code generates plots of embedding compression retrieval performance, VVS hyperparameter boxplots, VVS learning rate sweeps, and VVS repeat SMILES histogram.

```
cd src/data_analysis
./src/vvs_local/run.sh sweep
./src/vvs_local/run.sh embed
```

## 7. Comparison Benchmarks

We compare VVS to several other search methods. Each benchmark method first runs a hyperparameter sweep. Three replicas are run for each hyperparameter configuration against the `erbb1_mlp` score function. After all benchmarks are run, the results are analyzed to determine the best set of hyperparameters. Each method is then run for five replicas using the best set of hyperparameters against all score functions.

#### Hyperparameter sweeps

Hyperparameters tested are configured via a `sweep_space.yaml` file in the corresponding benchmark folder

SyntheMol:

```
cd benchmarks_synthemol/
./run.sh sweep
```

Thompson Sampling:

```
cd benchmarks_ts/
./run.sh sweep
```

RxnFlow:

```
cd benchmarks_rxnflow/
./run.sh sweep
```

RAD:

Note that `process_dataset.sh` only needs to be run once.

```
cd benchmarks_rad/
./process_dataset.sh
./run.sh sweep
```

VVS:

VVS hyperparameter sweeps are run in the above VVS section

#### Compile best results

This code parses all sweep runs to determine the best set of hyperparameters for each method

```
cd data_analysis
./src/benchmarks/run.sh sweep
```

This produces a summary CSV at `src/blob_store/internal/data_analysis/benchmarks/sweep/best_hyperparams.csv` which can be used to update the final hyperparameters.

#### Run Final Benchmarks

For each method, update the corresponding `final_space.yaml` config file and run benchmarks with the final hyperparameters.

```
cd src/{benchmarks_synthemol | benchmarks_ts | benchmarks_rxnflow | benchmarks_rad}
./src/benchmarks/run.sh final
```

For VVS final benchmarks, run 

```
cd src/vvs_local
./run.sh hyperparam_sweep --cfg bbknn_final.yaml --run_type final
```

#### Plot Results

To generate plots of benchmark comparisons, run:

```
cd src/data_analysis
./src/benchmarks/run.sh final
```
